---
title: "Religious Visions, the Lamb of God, and the Death of Humanism"
date: "2024-12-11"
excerpt: "An Examination of the Book of Revelation Through a Posthuman Lens"
---

The book of Revelation is not exactly a simple text. Even for those with doctorate degrees in theology, Revelation has rightfully earned a reputation as being the murkiest of Biblical waters. It’s simultaneously one of the most uniting and divisive books of the 52-volume scriptural canon; most Christians, whether clergy or laymen, agree that it is highly figurative. When it comes to interpreting much of the symbolism, though, plenty of theologians throw in the towel--and those that continue often couch their interpretations in cautious phrasing: “One possible interpretation,” “Perhaps,” etc. This is, of course, all very fair. The book, though vivid and beautiful, is frequently confounding, and those who have obsessed over its eschatology have often ended up swimming in the deep end of the lunatic pool. Unfortunately, we’ll be taking a dip into these treacherous channels in this essay. Specifically, we’ll be examining it through the lens of posthumanism, a modern ideological framework that seeks to dismantle the sputtering hubris of humanism. Posthumanism, as we’ll see, is often associated with the dynamics between Man and Animal. This relationship, incidentally, is one that plays out in the book of Revelation as a spectacular drama. In truth, rather than a crude imposition of modern ideals onto an ancient text, a reading of Revelation through a posthuman lens highlights the dynamics between Man, Creature, and their God, and helps draw out the significance of much of the book.

Posthumanism, as a set of ideas, is perhaps easiest defined as what it isn’t: humanism. To avoid being further reductionist, we’ll consider examples of it across Scripture, as well as the ideas of leading posthuman academic Rosi Braidotti. In the excellent collection of essays The Bible and Posthumanism, Jennifer Koosed examines how the Bible has been maligned as a solely human-centric text, and whether this is too simplistic a takeaway. She writes: “Arguably, the Bible begins as a speciesist manifesto--only humanity is created in the image of the divine, only humanity is given dominion over the rest of creation. However, the Bible also contains multiple moments of disruption, boundary crossing, and category confusion: animals speak, God becomes man, spirits haunt the living, and monsters confound at the end. All of these stories explore the boundaries of the human in ways that destabilize the very category of the human. All of these stories engage thinking that broadly falls under the umbrella term posthumanism” (3). Koosed points out that, though the Bible is not a posthuman text, examples of posthuman interaction and ideas are present throughout. The boundaries of manhood are being pushed and pulled. And as they are pushed and pulled, some ideas begin to emerge--one of these is an outright rejection of Man’s hubris. Braidotti, in her memoir-lectures, points out that “the humanist ideal inflates the human to universal dimensions: it skilfully combines high standards of physical perfection with intellectual and moral values, turning into a civilizational standard” (17). And why create these ideals? Because the arrogance of humanism is one that necessitates distinction. In Genesis, the distinction does not provide any room for self-aggrandizement: God, in His Wisdom, elected to create a limited being in His unlimited image. But under humanism, Man creates for himself wonderful boxes with glass panes to keep him separate from the Animal--a set of human categories like those you would fill out on a scholarship application. Race. Class. Gender. Physical Fitness. But as Braidotti excellently points out, under such frameworks, “who qualifies as human” (17)? Indeed, these arbitrary distinctions have frequently been used by Man to inflict violence upon “abnormal” people.

And what about the other side of this glass wall? What is the effect upon the Animal? In the Garden of Eden, we never see any violence towards animals--in fact, this word does not exist. Adam was aware of his distinction--curiously chosen by God to have friendship with Him--and yet, the “dominion” so famously observed is not oppressive or subjugatory. Consider this scene in Genesis 2:19-20--as the animals are brought before Adam, “The man gave names to all livestock and to the birds of the heavens and to every beast of the field. But for Adam there was not found a helper fit for him” (ESV). Notice the significance here--the animals are brought before Adam, not only for him to give them names (a parental imbuing of dignity), but to see if any of them are suitable companions for him. As we know, none of them are, and this prompts the making of Woman--an alike companion for the Man. But consider this--the “livestock” and “birds of the heavens” and “beasts of the field” (note the refusal to lump them all into one giant non-Man category) are not some filthy, inferior beings to be used and abused--they are viewed as fellow experiencers of the Earth. 

Jacques Derrida, famed French thinker and writer, had a large impact on posthumanism with his book The Animal that Therefore I Am, a play on Cartesian humanism. In it, he considers much the same scene. While going about his routine and stepping out of the shower, he comes face to face with his cat, staring at his naked body. He enters into a lengthy examination of the roots of humanity, shame, and the distinction between Man and Animal, in the process birthing a field known as Animal Studies. In one moment I find particularly helpful, he strikes at the heart of this imagined wall between Man and Animal: “Beyond the edge of the so-called human, beyond it but by no means on a single opposing side, rather than ‘the Animal’ or ‘Animal Life,’ there is already a heterogeneous multiplicity of the living’ (399). This categorization, he argues, is little more than an imaginary means of creating yet more separation between us and our various compatriots on Earth. This separation was not seen in the Garden of Eden. Yet clearly, there was a breakdown--by the time we get to Revelation, we’ve seen copious amounts of separation, as well as animal death--the examination of which could warrant another essay. So what does Revelation do about it? How does this grand restoration of all things deal with the human and non-human? 

A key figure to examine as we look at the boundaries of the human in Revelation is the Lamb. His appearance is crucial, so we’ll look at the whole scene.
>Then I saw in the right hand of him who was seated on the throne a scroll written within and on the back, sealed with seven seals. And I saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, “Who is worthy to open the scroll and break its seals?” And no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth was able to open the scroll or to look into it, and I began to weep loudly because no one was found worthy to open the scroll or to look into it. And one of the elders said to me, “Weep no more; behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has conquered, so that he can open the scroll and its seven seals.” And between the throne and the four living creatures and among the elders I saw a Lamb standing, as though it had been slain, with seven horns and with seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent out into all the earth. And he went and took the scroll from the right hand of him who was seated on the throne. And when he had taken the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, each holding a harp, and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints. 
(ESV, 5:1-8q)

As John is in the throne room, this scroll appears with the angel who inquires: Who might be worthy to open this scroll? In the presence of the throne room, the entire Earth is shocked into humility. Not even the most delusional man considers himself worthy. John begins to weep--the scroll being an allegory for salvation, no one is able to satisfy its conditions. But look--here comes a worthy one. And it is not what we might expect--Jesus as the glorified God-Man, in His heavenly robes, with light emanating from his outstretched hand. No, it is a Lamb--an Animal! The importance of this cannot be overstated. Stephen Moore, in his brilliantly titled essay that focuses on animal studies, Ruminations on Revelation’s Quadrupedal Christ, writes, “This is not the only metaphoric lamb in early Christian literature[...], but it may be the only four-legged one. [...] The result is a theriomorphic Messiah or quadrupedal Christ, a Jesus who now adds species crossing to the other border-crossing activities regularly attributed to him” (307). In a move that would have pleased Derrida, not only has Jesus taken on the form of a limited human, but now, a Lamb--that intensely not-human Animal. If this is not an exaltation of non-human creatures, I don’t know what is. This seven-eyed Lamb is not a mutant creature or something--rather, this is God himself, who has chosen to take the form of a weak, oppressed Animal. And in this way, it echoes a theme writ large across the Bible.

When Israel waited for the Messiah, they waited for a political firebrand who was good with a sword, someone who would show up and free them from Roman oppression. Instead, they got a poor carpenter from the bad part of the country. Likewise, in the throne room, we expect the warrior Jesus we see later in Revelation (19:11). Instead, we get an immature farm creature. And yet, this is the God-creature that is worthy. N.T. Wright points out the significance of the additional horns and eyes: “the lamb has seven horns and seven eyes. He is, that is to say, all-powerful and all-seeing. And he has the right to take the scroll and open it” (38). This is a tremendously significant inversion of power. In fulfillment of His own prophecy--“blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth” (Matt. 5:5), the Lamb takes the scroll and is identified as the one who deserves it all. It is no accident that this is a Lamb, not the glorified Jesus in human form. The presence of the Lamb reminds us of the His sacrificial death.

Though it’s difficult to know the exact attitude of God towards the earthly ethics of Animal death in the period between Genesis 3 and Revelation 1, we know for certain that all death is a fundamentally corrupt thing--since it started with the Fall and ends with the Second Coming. Though Scripture features the eating of meat, the death of non-human beings is clearly part of the “groaning” of all creation mentioned by Paul in Romans 8:22. Throughout Scripture, one of the foremost images is that of the Shepherd--one who cares for the creatures he loves--and shepherd is, of course, a title commonly given to God. So God loves animals, and, in His ideal world, they don’t die. But what about sacrifice? How does the ritual killing of beasts and birds fit into this? Since they all function as symbolism, i.e., the death of the innocent for the evil of the guilty, sacrifices ultimately emphasize the injustice of sin. The Israelites offering sacrifices were forced to confront what they had done--to look at it. They were tapped into a naturally understood reality--the killing of a creature is, on some basal level, unjust, whether performed by humans or non-humans.

And this is exactly what we see in Revelation. The death of the Lamb was superlatively powerful because it was the death of a perfect God, a perfect man. And the image chosen is the death of a Lamb--a disturbing image in and of itself. And God is emotional--Jesus, as He takes the form of a Lamb, demonstrates His empathy for His creation. Moore writes, “On the one hand, the Lamb suffers without speaking, that is, it suffers as an animal suffers. In Revelation, then, the torturous death of Jesus of Nazareth is figured as animal suffering. [...] The slaughter of [Revelation’s] singular animal was a heinous crime, so much so that when this creature returns ‘with the clouds’—whether as theriomorph, anthropomorph, or therioanthropomorph—‘every eye will see him, even those who pierced him; and on his account all the tribes of the earth will wail,’ implicitly because of the unspeakable injustice done to him. Does the Lamb have a face? Yes, it would seem, to the extent that killing the Lamb was a culpable act. The Lamb is that anomalous animal in whose (seven) eyes ‘Thou shalt not kill’ can be read” (312-317). Moore draws a clear line here from the horror of “animal” death to the even greater horror of the death of Jesus: deaths whose culpability lies with Man. Can one imagine a more anti-humanist text? Far from saving the day, Man is responsible for not just the deaths of million innocent creatures, but God himself. Humanism--the Renaissance distinctions between Man and Animal, the factory farms, the arrogant treatises, Michelangelo’s godlike David--all of it--instantly crumbles the moment the Messiah takes the form of a slaughtered Lamb. Ever the disrupter, the Good Shepherd becomes a weak Lamb.

Throughout the rest of Revelation, we see these themes of disruption crop up again and again. One of the most interesting examples, and one I wish there was more time to consider, is that of the living creatures in the throne room. The word “animal” would be not only inappropriate but nonsensical here. These are the most bizarre creatures we’ve seen. We unfortunately don’t get much clarification here, and there’s been historical disagreement about what the creatures represent, but they seem to encompass a symbolic representation of living things as a whole--the lack of a fish notwithstanding. There are a few key takeaways here: these are without a doubt heavenly beings--similar to angels. With our cultural imagination, we might want them to all have human forms and faces, but in fact it’s quite the opposite: they are covered in eyes, and only one has a man’s face. And, as Moore points out, we don’t even hear about the man-faced creature first--it isn’t set apart or distinctive in any way (308). In the vision of these four creatures who praise the God of Abraham and of Isaac, Man simply plays his role as Praiser #3. This brings us back to an important point: though set apart for unique relationship with God, Man is still fundamentally part of creation, and as such joins all the other creatures in the inevitable praise of Him. This equalization feels decidedly posthuman--or perhaps prehuman.

But where does all this carry us? If the establishment of the new reign in Revelation will be so forcefully opposed to the Man-centered arrogance of the past, what does this mean for “Man” and “Animal”? Unsurprisingly, the new eternity can be described in terms of non-human creatures. This predates Revelation: in the prophetic book of Isaiah, it is declared, “The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the young goat, and the calf and the lion and the fattened calf together; and a little child shall lead them [..] They shall not hurt or destroy in all my holy mountain; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD as the waters cover the sea” (11:6-9). Peace between creatures. No death. No infliction of pain or destruction. Here we get a vision of what comes after Revelation. It’s an eternal solution to the problems Humanism tried so desperately hard to solve. In some ways, such as its leveling of all creation before a holy God, or its vision of the Lamb, it’s decidedly “posthuman.” Of course, it would be foolish and exegetically indefensible to describe a book like Revelation as a posthuman text--such modern ideological frameworks rarely map well to ancient texts. In fact, I would argue that Revelation could be more accurately described as “prehuman”--it doesn’t just move past humanism, it literally acts as if it never happened. God and His will are all that have ever been. So, if that’s the case, what is the point of a posthuman analysis of Revelation?

Modern literary theory is predicated on the idea that looking at a text through a certain, explicitly stated lens allows us to draw out unique elements we might not have noticed otherwise. It also relies on the reader’s ability to see nuance and layers of meaning--since any single ideological lens will fail in ways when it attempts to interpret a text. To look at Revelation through a posthuman lens is not to declare that Revelation is posthuman. Rather, the uniquely posthuman themes in the book, particularly when it comes to the death of the Lamb, aid us in seeing new dimensions. Jesus’ death as a Lamb wasn’t merely because things had to stay thematically consistent across the scriptural canon. His death as a Lamb taps into the fundamental disturbance most of us feel in the face of creature death. This not only provides emotional weight, but conveys to us: this was wrong; something horrifying has happened here. And likewise, the return of the Lamb is an all-the-more potent image--the once-weak, once-murdered creature, exalted above all nations. His transformation and exaltation as the Lamb reminds us of Man’s actual place in the earth--and it’s not to play tyrant. The multifaceted appearance of the creatures reminds us that Man isn’t the central player in this text--God is. The posthuman, dynamic equalization expressed throughout Revelation refuses to kowtow to human demands for pre-eminence. As such, an examination of Revelation (and texts like it) through a posthuman lens enables us to see what we might not otherwise--after all, we still live in a very humanist world, so a little correction doesn’t hurt. Hopefully, this essay has been demonstrative of the exegetical helpfulness of such an approach even when it comes to sacred texts such as Revelation. 

#### Works Cited
<small> Braidotti, Rosi. "Posthuman, All Too Human: The Memoirs and Aspirations of a Posthumanist." The Tanner Lectures on Human Values. n.d. Delivered at Yale University, 2017.

Derrida, Jacques. “The Animal That Therefore I Am (More to Follow).” Tr. David Wills. Critical Inquiry, issue 28. The University of Chicago, 2002.

"Holy Bible." English Standard Version. Crossway, 2024.

Koosed, Jennifer L. "Humanity at Its Limits." The Bible And Posthumanism. Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 2014.

Moore, Stephen D. "Ruminations on Revelation's Ruminant, Quadruped Christ; or, the Even-Toed Ungulate That Therefore I Am." The Bible and Posthumanism. Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 2014.

Wright, N.T. Revelation for Everyone. Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2011. Paperback. </small>