---
title: "Christianity, Symbolism and Philosophy in The Grapes of Wrath"
date: "2022-04-21"
excerpt: "Steinbeck and God"
---

In the 80-plus years since Steinbeck published his magnum opus, The Grapes of Wrath, the landscape of literary criticism has changed significantly. Today, it isn’t difficult to find a wealth of recent articles discussing topics such as Grapes’ relationship with #MeToo, or the way Steinbeck characterizes automobiles. However, at the time of Steinbeck’s writing, critics were far more concerned with Steinbeck’s motives and means—was his novel simply socialist propaganda? Were his characters artistically created or were they merely props for Steinbeck’s moralism? Did Steinbeck mean to channel into some kind of symbolism or was he only writing about the conditions of migrants, nothing more? One issue in particular that critics have historically disagreed about is Steinbeck’s literary relationship with Christianity. His novels are often full of seeming allusions to the Bible (he titled one of his later works East of Eden, a reference to Adam and Eve’s banishment east out of the Garden of Eden). In The Grapes of Wrath, his characters regularly reference religion, with various degrees of belief and reverence. Steinbeck certainly seems to be using Christian references in his novel to some end. The question is: what is he using these allusions for? In the twenty-odd years after its publication, critics disagreed significantly about the treatment Christianity receives in Steinbeck’s work. What Steinbeck is actually doing, however, is layering all of these ideas and concepts on top of one another. What is far more interesting, however, is what these differences of opinion reveal about Steinbeck’s craft. The criticism surrounding Steinbeck and Christianity is a microcosm of many of the ideological conflicts that Steinbeck illustrates in The Grapes of Wrath. The critics of the time were largely unable to see this, as they were in the middle of these debates. Steinbeck, however, was using Christianity as a literary tool—not as a statement of belief.

Traditionally, literary critics have looked at Steinbeck’s use of symbolism with much emphasis on his relationship with Christianity—more specifically, several critics were very concerned with the question of whether The Grapes of Wrath was a Christian book. In large part, the confusion about this was due to Steinbeck himself: he did not intend for these questions to be easily answerable. Some critics at least recognized this—that there was ambiguity present that would not be decipherable on its own (de Schweinitz 369). On the more extreme end of the spectrum, there was Walter Fuller Taylor, who saw Steinbeck as a somewhat sinister figure, mangling Christianity to use towards his own secular ends. He wrote that The Grapes of Wrath was “an elaborately illustrated and reiterated philosophy of casual sex indulgence” (139)—not every critic even saw value in Steinbeck’s work. Literary critics today are generally much less concerned with answering these questions about Biblical symbolism than in years past—partially because Steinbeck himself contributed to an environment where these questions become less relevant. Steinbeck plays an interesting role here: he is part of a time period where the role of Christianity in fiction became more nuanced and ambiguous. Steinbeck, like other 20th-century authors, uses Christianity in a distinctly literary sense—he neither claims to believe in Christianity nor discredits it. Rather, his characters hold their own distinct ideas about faith, which Steinbeck uses to make his work more emotionally powerful. The death of Casy means much more if we see it as a type of sacrifice—the death of the holy man. In short, Steinbeck uses faith to create conversations about the shifting role of faith in American society. This strategy was increasingly used by authors in the 20th century, from Ernest Hemingway to Ray Bradbury. They draw attention to the decline of Christian-American culture as a common background in the US. Steinbeck clearly both took part in and spurred on this movement. Many critics at the time missed this, since they were in the middle of this shift. The disagreement they have with one another is a microcosm of the disagreement among Steinbeck’s characters: disagreements about orthodoxy, about the usefulness of faith, about the value of prayer in an age of mass injustice. 

The point of departure for this criticism was a pivotal article from critic Martin Shockley, who argued that The Grapes of Wrath is a Christian book through and through, from its morals to its symbolism to its prose. In keeping with this, he sees Rose of Sharon’s character peak as an echo of Christ’s resurrecting power. “In [Rose of Sharon], death and life are one, and, through her, life triumphs over death” (Shockley 89). The ending is remarkably stark, yet Shockley makes the case that it is ultimately beautiful—the tragedy of Rosasharn’s stillborn child contrasted with the act of mercy she performs in nursing a dying man. Interpretations like this cement to Shockley and like-minded critics that The Grapes of Wrath is Christian in its roots—that it is the expression of a mind deeply influenced by the Bible—that not only were Steinbeck’s references to Christianity intentional, they were pointed and nearly evangelistic. Such a decisive article was sure to provoke response, and, indeed, several later critics either reference Shockley or directly set out to rebut his thesis. One such critic was Eric W. Carlson, who confidently asserted that Shockley’s claims were completely wrong—indeed, that Steinbeck did not write a Christian book but one based in humanism. According to him, Steinbeck’s Grapes of Wrath is ultimately a celebration of the will of mankind, in a world lacking any kind of supernatural meaning. Carlson believes that Steinbeck intentionally made the cruelty and challenges faced by his characters seem meaningless—thus to discourage any heavy-handed metaphors from being inserted into the novel. Carlson’s interpretation of the work is thoroughly modernistic. He sees the book as a piece about the unvanquishable spirit and will of man. He argues that the “Christianity” Shockley and others see is nothing more than a social spirit, which, though associated with Christianity, ultimately need not be connected to it. Carlson essentially denies the existence of any intentional Biblical allusions in Steinbeck’s work. Carlson’s Grapes of Wrath is one which is too concerned with the practicalities of life to be concerned with the etherealities of heaven. To him, the novel is focused on “interdependence [and its] central theme, the primal drive of life” (175). At each point, he believes that Shockley is reading into the text what he wants to see. So, Shockley and Carlson are diametrically opposed in their viewpoints. Critic George de Schweinitz recognizes this and begins by stating that neither Shockley nor Carlson really understood what the other meant by “Christian.”  He continues to say that, regardless of the degree of intentionality critics may see in Steinbeck’s use of Christian allusions, they are too significant to throw away immediately. De Schweinitz writes: “Certainly there is still in the world that which ‘passeth all understanding’ and as long as there is, and a ‘scientific humanist’ as well as anybody else recognizes it, there will be the possibility of religion in life and religious motifs in art. And as long as there are such, there will be points, perhaps plenty of them, at which separate manifestations of these will touch, and even merge and coalesce” (369). De Schweinitz argues that mysticism is always an element of the human experience, so naturally it will find its way into human art in the form of religious symbolism or reference. The fabric of spirituality runs too deep in the heart of man to eliminate it from consideration. This is a fascinating position, one that is extremely prescient. De Schweinitz is striking at the heart of Steinbeck’s work—the Christian imagery in The Grapes of Wrath is not a statement of belief or orthodoxy—it is a means for Steinbeck to explore the cultural divides of his day. 

A third unique position is that of Frederic I. Carpenter, who wrote that the novel’s philosophy is directly descended from the ideas of Emerson and other distinctly American thinkers. Carpenter discusses the genius of Steinbeck’s work: the Joads are people who live out a distinctly American set of ideals. French historian Alexis de Tocqueville wrote, many years before Steinbeck, “It is easy to see, however, that nearly all the inhabitants of the United States […] possess, without ever having taken the trouble to define its rules, a certain philosophical method that is common to all of them” (699). To Carpenter, Jim Casy is the epitome of this theme. Carpenter explicitly threads together different strains of thought present. Emerson’s idealism and beliefs about sin are found clearly expressed in Casy. Whitman’s unabashed discussion of human physiology is found in the common joking and conversations we hear from the Joads. Carpenter points out the evolution of Christian Protestant and American ideas—“If a society has adopted ‘the quality of owning’ (as typified by absentee ownership) as its social norm, then Protestant nonconformity may become the highest virtue, and even resistance to authority may become justified” (“The Philosophical Joads,” 318). Carpenter sees that Steinbeck has taken this individual ethic of resistance and made it into something that applies equally to groups. He sees this most clearly in Steinbeck’s interchapters, pieces of varied prose where Steinbeck meditates on the banding-together of the migrants, such as in Chapter 14, where Steinbeck says, “This is the beginning—from ‘I’ to ‘we.’” Carpenter sees Steinbeck’s worldview as one of American and American Christian ideals translated into practical action, despite the circumstances. “…the point of the whole novel is that action is an absolute essential of human life. If need and failure produce only fear, disintegration follows. But if they produce anger, then reconstruction may follow” (323). Carpenter sees the ideology of Steinbeck as a culmination of years of American and American Christian philosophy. And in this way, Steinbeck is, according to him, classically American—and thus, heavily influenced by religion. All of these critics offer different perspectives, but they all stem from the heart of the same issue—what was Steinbeck doing with his use of Biblical allusions? 

I would argue that Steinbeck’s intention was not to provide a cohesive view on religion as expressed in imagery. Steinbeck is using Biblical allegory and imagery to bring out divides in his characters. The characters in The Grapes of Wrath approach faith from varying perspectives, from the simple devotion of Ma and Grandma Joad, to the wavering faith of Tom, to the unmentioned worldviews of their fellow travelers. Steinbeck uses these ideas as lenses through which to filter discussions of cultural, spiritual, and economic divides. These exact divides, however, showed up in the response to his work. The critics saw different, cohesive ideas about religion when they read The Grapes of Wrath.

A pivotal moment for all of these critical approaches is the death of Jim Casy, the wandering (former) preacher. Several critics believed that he was meant to represent an archetypal Christ figure—one who echoes Jesus throughout the story, beginning with his time in the wilderness. From there, Casy’s character arc is a fascinating one—he begins the novel by sheepishly offering his thoughts: “’There ain’t no sin and there ain’t no virtue. There’s just stuff people do. […] Maybe all men got one big soul ever’body’s a part of.’” But, as the novel progresses, he grows increasingly bold. He faithfully travels with the Joads, until he takes the blame for striking an officer and is arrested for Tom’s sake. As a character, Casy divides critics. They go their separate ways, until one night Tom stumbles across him in the woods. Casy is taking part in a workers’ strike and knows he has angered the authorities: “Them cops been sayin’ how they’re gonna beat the hell outa us an’ run us outa the county. They figger I’m a leader ‘cause I talk so much.” Casy is a supremely humble man—he barely even recognizes his own status among the workers on strike. But Casy clearly is an influential man: as he and Tom attempt to sneak away into the woods, they are trapped and surrounded by cops. “A sharp call, ‘There they are!’ Two flashlight beams fell on the men, caught them, blinded them. ‘Stand where you are.’ The voices came out of the darkness. ‘That’s him. That shiny bastard. That’s him.’ Casy stared blindly at the light. He breathed heavily. ‘Listen,” he said. ‘You fellas don’ know what you’re doin’. You’re helpin’ to starve kids.’ ‘Shut up, you red son-of-a-bitch.’ A short heavy man stepped into the light. He carried a new white pick handle. Casy went on, ‘You don’ know what you’re a-doin’.’ The heavy man swung with the pick handle. Casy dodged down into the swing. The heavy club crashed into the side of his head with a dull crunch of bone, and Casy fell sideways out of the light. ‘Jesus, George. I think you killed him.’ ‘Put the light on him,’ said George. ‘Serve the son-of-a-bitch right.’ The flashlight beam dropped, searched and found Casy’s crushed head” (Chapter 26). This shocking scene is widely regarded as one of the most pivotal points in the book, and, as such, has drawn out distinctive critical perspectives. To Shockley, this is one of the ultimate Christian parallels. He argues that Casy dies in the stream as a reference to the Judeo-Christian concept of “crossing over Jordan” (88). Shockley continues: “Particularly significant, however, are Casy’s last words directed to the man who murders him, ‘Listen,’ he said, ‘You fellas don’ know what you’re doin’.’” In Luke 23:34, as Jesus is being crucified, he says, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do” (ESV). Shockley sees this as a deliberate and pointed connection to Christ. Not all of his fellow critics agree, however. 

Carlson does admit that there is similarity in Casy’s dying words, but posits that these similarities stop at the semantic level. He writes, “In those final words, […] the ideas of resurrection and redemption are conspicuously absent […] the significance of Casy’s death lies in its indication of his love of man, a love that risked death even as Tom assumes Casy’s mission at the same risk.” Rather than being motivated by some spiritual depth, Casy’s actions come from a much simpler place of love for his fellow human beings. Throughout his analysis, Carlson eschews the Christian compassion seen by Shockley for a “love of man, channeled by a democratic sense of social justice and a realistic sense of practical action” (174). Thus he argues that, though the actions may appear the same, the motivation is very different. Shockley and Carlson represent two ends of the spectrum when it comes to Steinbeck’s use of Christian symbolism.

Carpenter sees Jim Casy as a very human, American leader. He examines Casy’s initial questioning of traditional Christian views of sex, arguing that Casy’s central ethic (as seen in his view of sex) is one of love—love rooted in human nature. This ties him to American thinkers such as Walt Whitman. Carpenter then ties this to Casy’s ultimate scene: “Jim Casy and Tom Joad have become more responsible and more purposeful than Pa Joad and Uncle John ever were: they love people so much that they are ready to die for them. Formerly the only unit of human love was the family, and the family remains the fundamental unit. The tragedy of The Grapes of Wrath consists in the breakup of the family. But the new moral of this novel is that the love of all people—if it be unselfish—may even supersede the love of family. So Casy dies for his people” (The Philosophical Joads, 321). Here we see the heart of Carpenter’s analysis: as the forces of inhuman greed destroy man’s closest bonds, the traditional ethics of family love and self-sacrifice are broadened into love and self-sacrifice for all of mankind. On a surface level, this is similar to Carlson’s analysis: Casy’s sacrifice is motivated by a love for his fellow men. Carpenter, however, ties it much more to various lines of American philosophy and ethics, transformed by the new social conditions faced by the migrant workers. This love of mankind, though, is very reminiscent of Shockley’s analysis of Casy as a Christ figure. None of these critical views are as distinct as they claim to be. Rather, Steinbeck was writing so that all of these things could be read at the same time. For years, the course of literary criticism has focused on the author’s exact intent or exact ideas. But the power of literature lies in its nuance—in the conversation it creates. Steinbeck layered all of these conversations and ideas on top of one another. They are neither mutually exclusive nor all true—in fact, the question of which views are correct is unimportant. Steinbeck is doing something far more ambitious than merely making a statement about man’s power to band together.

The critics of the time each believed that they had correctly interpreted Steinbeck’s work. For many years, this fostered debate as to which outlook was correct—which view or combination of views held the key to understanding Steinbeck’s use of religious imagery? Perhaps, though, it is far more revealing to examine all of these ideas at once. Steinbeck’s work enables very wide differences in opinion. The death of Casy was interpreted many different ways. All of these ideas taken together show an interesting picture: their conflicts mirror the conflicts in the book itself. A fundamental theme Grapes of Wrath is a breaking of America’s strongest ties. Families are strained to the breaking point under the crushing reign of the landowners. People are driven apart and then reformed into a collective group—the workers. In the midst of this splintering, we see different ideas of faith come into light. As Steinbeck’s book was presented as a book based on then-current events, it makes sense that Steinbeck would illustrate the differences in faith he was seeing in the American people. The critics of his time, however, were largely unable to see these differences, as they were a part of them. Thus, they each approached Steinbeck’s work from a completely different lens. Taking all of the critical interpretations into account, new questions arise. What is it about the nature of Christian symbolism that enables these readings to be stacked on top of one another? How does this kaleidoscopic view help us understand Steinbeck’s role in literature?

A crucial role of authors and thinkers is to combine things or ideas that don’t belong together. Steinbeck draws special attention to Christian orthodoxy and pairs it with sexual promiscuity, humanism, and despair. This creates a new lens through which he records his characters. This ambiguous, fluid ideological landscape brings all the more attention to the uniqueness of his characters—they don’t fit inside an easy-to-define ideological category. This forces us to drop any preconceived notions of why they act the way they do. We cannot simply view Casy’s actions as those of a literary Christ or an idealistic man. The array of worldviews Steinbeck incorporates doesn’t encourage one single interpretation. And yet, as fractured as the ideological landscape Steinbeck paints is, it is not incongruous. There is something about Christian symbolism that permits a unique amount of versatility. It can both call to mind centuries of cultural knowledge and be used to illustrate reinvented ideas. In the final scene of the book, Rose of Sharon gives the breast milk meant for her stillborn child to a dying man. Steinbeck writes, “Her hand moved behind his head and supported it. Her fingers moved gently in his hair. She looked up and across the barn, and her lips came together and smiled mysteriously.” This is certainly an allusion to the virgin Mary nursing Jesus, but it is never stated clearly. It is neither a direct tie to Scripture nor a triumph of humanism. This scene displays both the redemption of Christianity and the present despair faced by the migrants. Steinbeck clearly brings this melding of ideologies out in an early interchapter, where he says, “This you may say of man—when theories change and crash, when schools, philosophies, when narrow dark alleys of thought, national, religious, economic, grow and disintegrate, man reaches, stumbles forward, painfully, mistakenly sometimes. Having stepped forward, he may slip back, but only half a step, never the full step back.” This reaches towards the heart of Steinbeck’s work. The ideological divides become layers of the same story.

Steinbeck’s relationship with Christianity and Christian philosophy is fascinating and telling. There has long been critical disagreement about the meaning and intention behind supposed Biblical allusions in Steinbeck. Steinbeck certainly used such imagery and themes in his work. Steinbeck’s use of Christian symbolism, however, says much more about him as a writer and the culture around him than it does about his beliefs. At the time, critics interpreted his allusions as indicative of Steinbeck’s beliefs about religion—beliefs that they thought were clear-cut. Indeed, these critics sharply disagreed with one another and confidently asserted that their interpretation was correct. The interesting question is not which critic is correct, for asking such questions misses the crucial nuance of Steinbeck’s novel. Indeed, this kind of disagreement is a vital part of Grapes’ ideological landscape. Steinbeck is stacking these ideas on top of each other. Their interaction and coexistence creates new conversations and new ways of thinking.


#### Works Cited
<small> Carlson, Eric W. “Symbolism in the Grapes of Wrath.” College English, vol. 19, no. 4, 1958, pp. 172–75, https://doi.org/10.2307/371677.

Carpenter, Frederic I. “The Philosophical Joads.” College English, vol. 2, no. 4, 1941, pp. 315–25, https://doi.org/10.2307/370490.

de Schweinitz, George. “Steinbeck and Christianity.” College English, vol. 19, no. 8, 1958, pp. 369–369, https://doi.org/10.2307/372039.

Shockley, Martin. “Christian Symbolism in the Grapes of Wrath.” College English, vol. 18, no. 2, 1956, pp. 87–90, https://doi.org/10.2307/372506.

Steinbeck, John. The Grapes of Wrath. Penguin Books, 2006.

Taylor, Walter Fuller. “The Grapes Of Wrath Reconsidered: Some Observations on John Steinbeck and the ‘Religion’ of Secularism.” The Mississippi Quarterly, vol. 12, no. 3, 1959, pp. 136–44, http://www.jstor.org/stable/26473435.

The Bible. English Standard Version, Crossway, 2016. https://www.esv.org 
Tocqueville, Alexis de, et al. Democracy in America. Vol. 2, Liberty Fund Inc, 2012. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=nlebk&AN=603138&site=eds-live&scope=site. </small>
