---
title: "Identity, Mutability, and Agency in Shakespeare and Wilde"
date: "2025-05-25"
excerpt: "Or, The Unimportance of Being Earnest"
---

Few issues are more central to the human experience than identity. Whether repressed or expressed, identity seems to be an odd hurdle that many of us spend our lives wrestling with. Much of the art we have produced as a species revolves around identity—whether perceived or desired. In “Treasure,” Bruno Mars offers to actualize a woman’s identity, and in “Good Day Sunshine,” Paul explains that a woman has actualized his. Identity frames nearly everything in our lives: much of modern psychotherapy involves deconstructing harmful ideas we’ve tied to our identity. Considering all this, it stands to reason that competing theories of identity and self-actualization have been circulating for millennia. In perfect congruence with this are theories of agency. Indeed, agency seems to be immutably bound to our construction of identity, however it presents itself. For our identity to be actualized, there must be some innate belief about our subsequent role (and our ability to play it). In the texts we’ll be looking at here, I believe that there are two very distinct concepts of identity and agency presented—and, oddly enough, both concepts have an enormous foothold in the American psyche.

I’d like to begin with an examination of our first text: Shakespeare’s A Midsummer Night’s Dream. Let’s begin with Act 1. From the beginning of the play, we are led to a rather explicit conclusion. As Egeus stomps in, complaining about his daughter, he tells us that he believes Lysander has bewitched his daughter: “Thou has by moonlight at her window sung / With feigning voice verses of feigning love / … /With cunning hast thou filched my daughter’s heart, / Turned her obedience (which is due to me) / To stubborn harshness.” (1.1) It’s a Romeo-Juliet setup. We aren’t supposed to believe this harsh father. Even through his description of the lovers’ rituals (“bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits”), we are instructed to see this as an innocent, sweet example of young love. Once alone, their lament incites pity: “The course of true love never did run smooth”. The play could hardly be clearer—we are supposed to cheer for this. But why? Because it is sincere. Midsummer Night’s Dream is a play that worships sincerity. Even in the end, when all is ending well, we hear from Theseus: “…never anything can be amiss / When simpleness and duty tender it” (5.1). In the moral world of Midsummer, a simple but sincere act is preferable to a skillful but cunning one. Sincerity is a heavenly virtue.

This, of course, gives us some foundation for our understanding of identity in Midsummer. As sincerity is a virtue, it is a declaration of truth—the truth being one’s “heart” or inner self—which, it is important to note, cannot be changed by oneself. Returning to Hermia’s initial interrogation by Theseus, she declares that under no circumstances can she, in good conscience, marry Demetrius: “So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord, / Ere I will yield my virgin patent up / Unto his Lordship whose unwishèd yoke / My soul consents not to give sovereignty” (1.1). Hermia protests: there is nothing she can do about her feelings, her heart. In this sense, identity is evident and pre-created. This makes sense—in the Christian England of Shakespeare, belief in the eternal decrees of God was assumed, not stated—even in a professedly “pagan” play. If one is not in control of one’s identity (even in such intimate matters of self-actualization as love), then sincerity is the best attitude to have—honesty is the best policy. Once again, we see a parallel to the Christian theology of the time: God is immutable, and, in a way, so is His creation. Such doctrine is commonly expressed through the vehicle of sovereignty; i.e., nothing happens outside of God’s will—no changes, creations or destructions.

This brings us to an extremely crucial point of Midsummer: the illusion of agency. In the world Shakespeare creates, there is no real agency for our protagonists. Look at the central action of the play: the general helplessness of the characters against the actions of the “fairies.” In Oberon’s first appearance, he claims that his and Titania’s failing romance is causing natural disasters: “Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain, / As in revenge have sucked up from the sea contagious fogs, which, falling in the land, / Hath every pelting river made so proud / That they have overborne their continents” (2.1). Presumably, thousands of people have had their lives drastically affected by these non-human actors. Furthermore, they spend much of the play meddling directly, through misapplied love potions and species-shifting. Again, the total helplessness of the characters cannot be understated. Each time a love potion is drunk, it works quickly and totally. In fact, Titania herself is made to fall in love with a half-donkey, suggesting that even the fairies are bound by some higher power. There is a real hierarchy of control here, and the humans are found at the bottom. This is, once again, an extremely important link to English Christianity—in particular, the still-growing Protestantism of the time. One of the early Protestant figureheads, Martin Luther, did an excellent job explaining the Reformed idea of agency in his treatise The Bondage of the Will. I’ll refrain from citing it, for briefness’ sake, but the title alone tells us enough: Luther’s central argument (and a pervading view of Protestant England) was that “free will,” or agency, was something of an illusion—that, while we might feel as if we have agency, we never do anything other than that which was set in motion by decree. Though Shakespeare’s characters certainly display some sense of willpower, their actions are largely dependent on the decisions of others. This idea of will bondage is present throughout Midsummer Night’s Dream.

And so, if we truly have no significant agency, what are we to do? Shakespeare’s answer: act in honesty and sincerity. Deception, in the world of Shakespeare, is reserved for non-humans or jesters. Attempting to get what we want by dishonest means only results in tragedy for all involved (see Macbeth). In fact, much of our identity comes by way of our “bondage.” Notice that none of the young lovers in Midsummer Night’s Dream really attempts to burst out of their assigned station in life, or their role of sincerity. They merely want what has been imprinted upon them (by God or Puck), and seek after that person with all their might. There is not a total lack of identity here, but, for Shakespeare’s characters, a key metric of goodness and morality is their willingness to act with sincerity on those parts of their God-given identity which they cannot change. Likewise, they are not faulted for such, even when it is something bizarre—notice the comedic tone of Titania’s waking: “My Oberon, what visions I have seen! / Methought I was enamored of an ass” (4.1). Shakespeare doesn’t fault her for some mild form of bestiality—after all, it’s not her fault. And, to the same point, to a lesser extent, no one in the play is faulted for who they love. There is merely an implicit command to be true to said love.

Of course, the characters remain true to this. And in the end, all is well. Each young person ends up with a soulmate. But it’s worth noting that this is not necessarily an action-consequence pair: they don’t receive the happy ending because they acted with sincerity. They receive the happy ending because the fairies decide to fix everything up nicely. “May [they all] to Athens back again repair / And think no more of this night’s accidents / But as the fierce vexation of a dream. / … / Now thou and I are new in amity, / And will tomorrow midnight solemnly / Dance in Duke Theseus’ house triumphantly, / And bless it to all fair prosperity. / There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be / Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity” (4.1). This is Oberon’s benevolent moment. He declares that everything will be fixed up in time for a triple wedding. But this has very little to do with the characters’ actions themselves. If it weren’t for the “vexation of a dream,” they would still be trapped in a bizarre, complicated love triangle. This is more of a fitting reward for their sincerity. At the risk of overstating the obvious, this concept of benevolent power has still more in common with Christianity in England. And, as such, this play and its ideas are still major influences in the U.S. and Western thought more broadly.

The U.S. is very in tune with A Midsummer Night’s Dream concepts of identity and agency (which is certainly part of its popularity here and elsewhere). You don’t need to spend more than a couple minutes flicking through Disney+ to find a few dozen narratives with the same core theme: sincerity is a virtue. Sincerity to oneself and ones identity. With this, we also see identity as pre-destined (like the characters in Midsummer experience it). Consistent narratives of be true to yourself end up creating a craving for self-discovery. For many Americans, introspection is not even enough. Ayahuasca, meditation, an outside perspective, a litany of half-forgotten hobbies, or any pseudo-scientific personality test must step up to aid us on our journey to the center of the self. We continue to try it all in our search for who we are. Of course, this can come across (and does) as somewhat farcical, when we stop to consider that we are ourselves. But this doesn’t stop us. I will refrain from enumerating the ways in which this philosophy of identity eventually becomes a prison, but suffice it to say that the forceful uncovering of identity and the command to be sincere can end up crushing many people. But, of course, this is not the only theory of identity advanced by our surroundings.

We arrive now at The Importance of Being Earnest. It might be hard to pick another lighthearted, comedic text that is so very opposed to the self-actualization proposed by Shakespeare. As usual, Wilde was ahead of the curve. To start, we’ll look at the ending, where everything becomes clear: both men end up with the women they wanted to be engaged to, despite the deception about their identities and names. Cecily loves Algernon anyway (despite the fact he never was, and never will be named Ernest), and Gwendolen loves Jack (and his name was actually Ernest). The conversation between Cecily and Gwendolen in the thick of it all in Act 3 is very revealing: after Algernon has told Cecily he lied about his identity to “have an opportunity of meeting [her],” Cecily and Gwendolyn talk about this excuse. Cecil expresses that she doesn’t believe him, but that this “does not affect the wonderful beauty of his answer.” Gwendolyn muses: “True. In matters of grave importance, style, not sincerity is the vital thing.” Well, there we have it. Wilde makes it as plain as he can: sincerity isn’t worth anything. In fact, considering the play’s ending (all parties end up happy), it seems that sincerity would have just ruined things. Deception and style are what helped the men to woo the women they love, even after they found out. Indeed, considering that Jack is revealed to be named Ernest, he has unintentionally been more honest than if he had stated his apparent name. Wilde’s point is clear: sincerity is not a virtue; it’s more of a weakness. The sooner we stop binding ourselves to it the better. Sincere guys finish last.

And, just as in Midsummer Night’s Dream, this attitude towards sincerity has implications for identity. Here, being “true to ourselves” is just doing what we see fit. There is no command to stay true to some preordained identity. Such preordained, immutable identities don’t even exist: Jack learns that living a lie was truer than living the truth. In this framework, agency is supreme. Not only is identity actualized through agency—it is created and sustained through agency. Identity, in a way, is little more than the sum of one’s agency. Our identity is what we make it.

A far cry from Midsummer Night’s Dream’s worship of sincerity, The Importance of Being Earnest teaches that our identity isn’t even fixed—our identity is created through self-presentation. Self-actualization is not just creating space for our identity, it is bearing identity itself. As always, Wilde was vastly ahead of his time—this is a core component of queer culture and queer notions of identity, and would be hugely influential in the 20th century. This was a very fundamental theoretical stone that Wilde was laying.

Through these ideas of identity and agency, Wilde brings home one of the key points of Earnest: the impossibility of personal growth. The men in the story learn literally nothing from the complicated deception they’ve been engaged in the entire time. They have no remorse, as evidenced in a hilarious scene outside: 
> “How can you sit there, calmly eating muffins when we are in this horrible trouble, I can't make out. You seem to me to be perfectly heartless.”
“Well, I can't eat muffins in an agitated manner. The butter would probably get on my cuffs. One should always eat muffins quite calmly. It is the only way to eat them.”

There is some fear of consequences, but these never materialize: the women end up loving them anyway. Indeed, there’s no real lesson given at all. The play seems to ask: what is deception anyway, if identity is self-constructed? Much like the characters from Seinfeld, all of our characters come away having learned nothing—perhaps even having learned how to be more effectively deceptive.

The play’s final line is the ultimate crystallization of this: “I’ve now realized for the first time in my life the vital Importance of Being Earnest.” The typical meaning of this would be that he has learned to be sincere in all future dealings. But this is Wilde. And the man’s name is Ernest. With a wink to the audience, it’s clear what is really meant. The importance of being Ernest is the importance of being who you claim to be—the importance of keeping the deception alive, in a way.
Earnest, as a play, is a forerunner of much of modern culture, including American culture. For me, it feels like an introduction to our current philosophical environs, where identity is a flexible concept. As already mentioned, the play is riddled with what would later become founding concepts of Queer culture. On the other end of the spectrum, though, there is a strong association with the “rugged individualism” of the American mythos. In contrast to the passivity and sincerity of the characters in Midsummer, the men in Earnest are rewarded for the creation of their identity, and all the steps it took to create these identities. There is a very real sense of “self-made man” here, even if “self-made” is taken a little more literally than usual. In conjunction with this, we see a very real throughline to the American value of persistence—one doesn’t need to look far to find American businesses started up with a spirit of deception and misrepresentation—many of them successful. 

So, these two plays really couldn’t be more different in the way they tackle questions of identity. And yet, they both tap into strong philosophical roots in modern America (and around the world). I believe that this tension is visible everywhere today. From immigration to gentrification, many core issues of America’s psyche are rooted in this question: who are we? Are we what we do—what we become? Or are we meant to fulfill some predetermined course? Of course, you can find people all along this ideological spectrum, but I think it’s interesting how visibly these two competing frameworks of identity coexist in the U.S. In a way, I don’t think Wilde would have minded that much—after all, his framework of identity allows people to construct their identity however they want, even if it relies on some presupposed outside power. And while speculating about Shakespeare’s views is useless, I do find it fascinating how his ideas of sincerity have permeated our romantic landscape. Even among the more sexually liberated, many Americans (and global citizens) have a deep-seated longing to eventually find a soulmate—an idea very rooted in Shakespearean and Christian mythos. Ultimately, much of Wilde’s work attempts to destroy the idealization of sincerity and pre-determined identity. And while Shakespeare’s frameworks of identity, sincerity and agency have proved very popular, many people find themselves at a loss when their life no longer fits within that framework (unwanted divorce, loss of a job, etc.).
 
#### Works Cited
<small> Shakespeare, William. A Midsummer Night’s Dream from the Folger Shakespeare. Ed. Barabara 

Mowat, Paul Werstine, Michael Poston, and Rebecca Niles. Folger Shakespeare Library. 
https://folger.edu/explore/shakespeares-works/a-midsummer-nights-
dream/

Wilde, Oscar. The Importance of Being Earnest. Accessed from Cove Collective, provided by 
instructor. </small>
