---
title: "Infinities of Nothingness"
date: "2025-04-30"
excerpt: "Conceptions of Infinity in Camus’s L’Étranger"
---

In Camus’s landmark work L’ Étranger, the prose follows the main character’s inner monologue for the entirety of the work. While not written with the verbosity of Joyce or the quick logical leaps of Hemingway, Camus’s own variety of stream-of-consciousness writing serves its unique purpose well: it gives us a window into a man who would otherwise be entirely unreadable. We are not getting additional access—we are getting the only access there is into the thoughts and feelings of Mersault. This allows us to watch him process the cataclysmic events of the novel with his famously detached attitude. In several key moments of the novel, he comes face-to-face with infinity. Much has been made of the endless troves of meaning Mersault and his counterpart, Sisyphus, may create if they dwell on this infinity. But little has been said about the broader philosophical context of these infinities, as well as the role they play in their respective works. In this essay, I’ll be examining conceptions of infinity in L’ Étranger—attempting to draw out the way that Camus uses infinity to create an almost hellish sense of absurdity in the reader. I’d like to do this by examining historical, religious and philosophical understandings of infinity to learn more about Camus’s infinity, as well as the human condition.

When L’ Étranger was released, the world was nearly ripe for absurdist dialogue. And in the aftermath of the deadliest war in human history, this came into full effect. Newly faced with human atrocities and the depths of suffering (and victory), Western academic circles hailed Mersault as a modern hero of truth, and Camus as yet another prophet of what could come next in a world without God. Within the novel, as well as his other works, Camus engaged with nihilism and existentialism, while overall preaching the gospel of absurdism. This absurdism would prove to be a fundamental pillar of postmodernism in the years to come.

Oddly enough, when it did, the absurdism of Camus fell out of some favor. Indeed, as early as 1960, Louis Hudon proclaimed, “L’ Étranger […] can never again exist in the magnificently naked purity of the text which captured and has held the attention of the now almost middle-aged ‘youth’ of the early post World War II period. Ironically, the principal corrupting agent was Camus himself.” (59) Hudon was not alone—other critics had begun souring on Camus, and those who hadn’t soured on the man himself were complaining about the critical discourse surrounding Camus more broadly. They were tired of interpretations that made too much of the novel—that held up Mersault as some kind of modern hero. Here is an excerpt from a journal article from 1970 proclaiming just that: “The Stranger is not a mature work of art. Its moral complexity lies in the minds of the critics, not in the novel. Its basic reality is the confrontation of a well-intentioned (if limited) individual with an insensitive and even hostile world.” (Wagner 30) In the service of his art, Camus resisted attempts to dissect his work endlessly. But this drew some critics to argue that there really was no Wizard of Oz here—just a confused young Frenchman operating the philosophical special effects. Of course, with the benefit of over 80 years of hindsight, we can take a more balanced view of L’ Étranger today. While the novel may not be littered with religious and cultural allegory, it is certainly not devoid of these themes, and wields them skillfully in its general slog towards death. One of these key themes explored, but rarely analyzed, is infinitude.

Infinity, as a concept, is present throughout Camus’s system of philosophy, and he explicitly draws it out several times in L’ Étranger. The many mentions of the sun and heat are certainly tied to infinity: the heat is described as coming in waves, conjuring up a mental image of a swimming, endless ocean of heat pouring down on Mersault; however, this is not our primary passage. No, the crux of Mersault’s dealings with infinity comes when he is in prison. After wondering how he will pass the time with no cigarettes and no women, Mersault begins to find a way. We read, 
> “Once I’d learned the trick of remembering things, I never had a moment’s boredom. Sometimes I would exercise my memory on my bedroom and, starting from a corner, make the round, noting every object I saw on the way. At first it was over in a minute or two. But each time I repeated the experience, it took a little longer. I made a point of visualizing every piece of furniture, and each article upon or in it, and then every detail of each article, and finally the details of the details, so to speak: a tiny dent or incrustation, or a chipped edge, and the exact grain and color of the woodwork. At the same time I forced myself to keep my inventory in mind from start to finish, in the right order and omitting no item. I found that the more I thought, the more details, half-forgotten or malobserved, floated up from my memory. There seemed no end to them.” (2.II)

Mersault comforts himself by slowly “zooming in,” as it were, on everything around him. He finds that his cell contains so much information that he could study it his whole life and never learn it all. Later, he finds a newspaper fragment and does something similar—he reads the text over and over until it becomes part of his ingrained subconscious. Similar to Sisyphus, Camus seems to intend for us to believe that this infinitude, once opened, can be an endless source of mental occupation and (to some extent) self-actualized meaning. But this is not just another expression of existential absurdism. Here, Camus very intentionally taps into a dichotomy that has been troubling humanity for millennia, using it to drive the point home—a point that reverberates throughout our modern experience.

To begin our examination of Mersault’s infinity, we will look at the fundamental conception of infinity. What, exactly, is it? While we have mathematical definitions involving cardinal numbers and more, these rarely prove helpful for most people. This is by no means a new question. Aristotle wrestled with the idea of infinity in his writings, and came to the conclusion that infinity was possible as a concept, but not as a discrete entity (i.e., infinity could exist, but the concepts of multiple infinities, or infinity plus infinity, were impossible). Here’s critic Jaako Hintikka’s explanation: “As Aristotle says, ‘one thing after another is always coming into existence’. In other words, infinity is not a term which applies to individual things, such as men or houses, in any sense, either actually or potentially. Rather, it is an attribute of certain sequences of individual things or individual events—‘definite if you like at each stage, yet always different’.” (199) Infinity was something that did exist to Aristotle, but was similar to how we would think of a mathematical series to infinity today. This, as it turns out, is how many of us first discover infinity. David Tall writes: “Certain early intuitions concern cardinality. The realisation that the counting process is unending is perhaps the first of these. The young child realises the potential infinity of the natural numbers and that the process of counting can never cover all of them” (32). The discrete nature of Aristotle’s definition is important: infinity is primal, and made up of individual, countable parts. It is not a stand-alone, pure concept, nor can it be.

Discussions of infinity on a more mystical level predate Aristotle. Throughout ancient religious texts, the concept of infinite time, or, more properly, eternity, was used as an illustration of human limitation in comparison to the divine. The Judeo-Christian Scriptures refer to God as the “Alpha and Omega,” or beginning and end. John 1 is a philosophical treatise on the birth of time and the infinite existence of the divine: “In the Beginning was the Word.” Early Church Fathers were obsessed with eternity and God’s infinite nature as well. Albert-Kees Geijon, writing of Gregory of Nyssa, says:
>“Starting from God's infinity, [Gregory] concludes that the ascent of the soul to God is unending. The soul longs for God but its desire is never satiated because the object of its desire is without end. The ascent to God is illustrated by the figure of Moses, who never stops ascending but always finds a step higher than the one he had attained. Moses' desire to see God is recorded in Ex. 33. His longing is, however, never fulfilled, as Gregory explains: 'this truly is the vision of God: never to be satisfied in the desire to see him. But one must always, by looking at what he can see, rekindle his desire to see more. Thus, no limit would interrupt growth in the ascent to God, since no limit to the Good can be found nor is the increasing of desire for the Good brought to an end because it is satisfied'” (Geijon 163)

Thus, the longing for infinity is one that is divinely implanted, but never able to be satisfied here, by divine decree. The pursuit of infinity, though a pursuit of something very non-human, is a pursuit of the Divine essence.

Here, we see a distinction beginning to emerge: infinity as fundamentally rational or fundamentally irrational. This distinction will continue to grow. With Newton’s discovery of Calculus, a mental problem that had been posed by mathematicians over 1500 years earlier was realized: the possibility of infinite units in a finite space. In the era of the Enlightenment, infinity was controversial: as a concept that could never be fully visualized or enumerated by humans, it seemed to fly in the face of reason—and yet, the proofs were there. Rachel Feder calls this the cultural “crisis of infinity.” (171) Berkeley’s critique of Newtonian calculus loudly proclaimed that “he who can digest a second or third Fluxion, a second or third Difference, need not, methinks, be squeamish about any Point in Divinity,” essentially declaring that those who believed in calculus had no excuse not to also believe in God. (Feder 174) And yet, Newton’s work was backed up with sound mathematical logic.

Ever the rationalist, Kant built on Newton and Aristotle and argued that understanding of infinity existed in humanity a priori, not as an esoteric belief, but as a simple matter of moving through space. Kant believed that, from a young age, we naturally understand that three-dimensional (Euclidean) space is both infinite in its possible scope and infinitely divisible in its entirety. Parsons writes, “It follows from the fact that the empirical objects of perception are in an infinitely divisible space that they are indefinitely complex. For the spatial region which an object occupies can be divided into subregions, which again can be so divided, and so on.” This should look very familiar. It’s the same basic exposition of infinity that Mersault undertakes—an infinite amount of information in a finite amount of space. (Parsons 185)
	
At the same time, there was growing resentment among the Romantics of a rational infinity. For them, infinity was not a fundamental truth to be dug up, but a mystical concept, accessible through the mathematical and artistic Sublime.
>“To see a World in a Grain of Sand
And a Heaven in a Wild Flower
Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand
And Eternity in an hour”
-William Blake, Auguries of Innocence (Feder 185)

Here, we see a return to the earlier, ancient religious expressions of eternity and infinity. It is not something to be dissected, for this is neither possible nor good. It is a mysterious tenet of the universe, partially revealed to us by the divine nature. The overwhelming incomprehensibility of it is the point. For the Romantics, infinity was a-human—it was not hostile to humanity, but was not created for us to grasp or use, merely to approach. Infinity was divine. All of this—infinity as reason, infinity as divinity, the infinite divisibility of all things, leaves us back in the cell with Mersault. As Mersault examines his room, Camus knowingly taps into this dialogue. 

Before we examine Camus’ use of infinity itself, I’d like to provide an anecdote. When I was young, I had a very odd dream. I am aware that citing dreams in research is by no means standard practice, but I think this will prove helpful. When I arrived in the dream, I found myself standing in front of a simple, modular metal array of horizontal shelves and filing drawers, like you would find at an office supply store. Packing the horizontal shelves in front of me were these small organizer bins, each with an assortment of objects: paper clips, tacks, etc. In my hand, I held a few things: a couple tacks, a rubber band, a staple remover. I had this deep sense of urgency: I had to sort these things. I looked back and forth at the shelves, and realized that all the shelves were filled with random, tiny objects that had to be sorted somewhere into a file drawer. Before I knew what was going on, my brain zoomed out from the scene. I was standing in the middle of thousands, millions, billions of rows of shelving. As far as the eye could see in any direction, it was nothing but gray shelving lit with fluorescent lights. I started working. I made minute movements, infinitesimally adjusting my body to pick up each object and slowly file it away, knowing it would take me all of eternity. Suddenly, my entire body and brain were taken over with the most deeply troubling sense of torment I’ve ever felt in a dream. I felt like Sisyphus himself—I would be forced to slowly sort tiny objects forever. I had stumbled into some bizarre, absurdist horror fantasy.

The point here is that, at a young age, I bumped up against something deeply bizarre: I knew exactly what was ahead of me (eternity of sorting objects), and was so utterly horrified by the prospect of doing this mundane task forever that my whole body recoiled in terror. Now, of course I’m aware that Camus’s Sisyphean dream is the search for meaning in the smallest details and struggles. But, nevertheless, he is under no major illusions about the human psyche. When examining Mersault, we, as readers, are confronted with something fundamentally strange. Mersault’s mental escapades counting the objects and dents in his room is both a tie to the (now-dead) Divine and the primal. His explanation about infinity is not new. It is the meeting point of the mystical, Divine nature: the incomprehensibility of infinity—and the rational, human nature: the  comfort and graspability of infinity. In the same instance that Mersault cannot truly hold every infinite piece of information about his cell in his mind, Mersault is occupying infinite discrete units in space.

Okay, so what’s the point? Camus’s ties to philosophical and historical ideas of infinity are obviously quite potent, but how do these competing notions of infinity serve to further Camus’s work, and the plotline followed by Mersault? Well, Camus’s fundamental sense of absurdism comes into play here. Throughout L’ Étranger, Camus wants to drive home a central point: there really is no significance. No one is coming to save you or make your life less meaningless. And yet, one must continue with life as if this were not the case. Writing about The Stranger, Camus states: 
>“Mersault for me is not a piece of human wreckage, but a man who is poor, naked and in love with the sun which leaves no shadows. Far from being lacking in all feeling, he is inspired by a passion which is profound because unspoken, the passion for the absolute and for truth. It is still a negative truth, that of being alive and experiencing life, but without it no conquest of oneself or of the world will ever be possible. One would not therefore be much mistaken in reading L’ Étranger as the story of a man who, without any heroics, accepts to die for the truth. It also occurs to me to say, and always paradoxically, that I tried to represent in my character the only Christ that we deserve…” (Wagner 28)

The truth is one’s experience. Apart from this, there is no grander scheme provided for us. No blueprint or roadmap. This is the essence of absurdism and Camus’s central tenet (if you can call it that).

Of course, the key way that absurdism presents itself is in contradictions. The Dadaists were very keyed into this, and laid the groundwork for some of Camus’s work. Marcel Duchamp’s “Ready-Made” series was not interesting because Duchamp made it, but because he presented everyday, ugly objects he did not produce as art. The contradiction—a urinal with the signature of a proud artist—stood right in front of you. Finnigans Wake is not merely interesting because the sounds are nice. It is interesting because it is a wake poem containing outright nonsense, presented as solemn, earnest verse.

L’ Étranger is no different. From the beginning of the novel, we are confronted with seeming contradictions: My mother died, but I’m not sad. I hate the local pimp, but I’ll help him if I can. I’m passive and quiet, but I’ll shoot a man 5 times. At every turn, Camus throws us off like he’s in a car chase: STOP LOOKING FOR A TIDY MESSAGE. And, in my opinion, the dealings with infinity are some of the best examples of this. Infinity is rationality perfected—it’s rationality defied. It’s humanity’s intellectual triumph—it’s humanity’s intellectual border wall. As Mersault finds entertainment in infinity, we feel both attracted to the amount of information available to us and repulsed by its infinitesimal scale—pulled by humanity, pushed by the Divine.

And this encounter with infinity is profoundly absurd. The whole notion of infinity is absurd, in and of itself—after all, Aristotle flat-out refused to consider discrete, conceptual infinities. And the finite nature of human intellectual existence compared to the infinite—well, it’s quite a contrast. Victor Brombert, quoting Sartre, says:
>“This notion of the absurd or irrational aspect of life arises from various causes, all of which result from the divorce between man and the universe. For, indeed, nothing is intrinsically absurd: ‘To be sure, neither man nor the universe, if taken separately, is absurd; but since it is the essential nature of man to exist-in-the-world, the absurd becomes one and the same with the human condition.’ The stranger, then, is man facing the world, man realizing the gap between the eternal nature of the universe and his own finite nature, and perceiving how much his worries are out of proportion with the futility of all his efforts.” (120)

So to consider the infinite amount of details you could extract from a single prison cell is quite absurd. And yet, Mersault is oblivious and uncaring to this—he simply plows through, taking out what helps him most to cope with the moment. Camus, as the all-knowing author, does not force his character to take pause. No, Mersault’s pursuit of the basic truth of existence leads him to bypass these sorts of questions, much as he bypasses questions of religious belief and moral culpability. The conflict between the divine and the human throughout L' Étranger remains nothing more than a backdrop against which our character moves. And so Camus’s use of infinity becomes a subtle, subconscious emotional escalator. We feel the fundamental human conflict. We are bothered that he is unbothered. And yet, he continues.

So why does any of this matter? Well, for one, I think the specific philosophical conception of infinity is something that often gets ignored in Camus scholarship—critics are much more likely to draw more direct parallels from stoicism or mania. But rarely does anyone pause to look at what is driving the dialogues around infinity. Furthermore, I believe that Camus taps into something here that is very important. These days, thinking about infinity has largely been relegated to astro-science and religion. And yet, Camusian constructions of infinity are everywhere. A cursory search of the internet will provide hundreds of fitness enthusiasts who speak of finding joy and meaning in the simple, meaningless action of raising a weight. It doesn’t take much interaction with working Americans to find people who will tell you they are happy that their job never changes—they just do it and it’s peaceful for them (which may be true, but is also frequently a coping mechanism). The entire process of corporate ladder-climbing is relatively insignificant and pathetic from the outside. But once you’re in? It gives you motivation to do better at work every day, to be nice to your boss, to work overtime hours. These Sisyphean rites are not just repetitive actions—they become rituals, in which we look for extra details to make our day more interesting (albeit on a lesser scale than Mersault has to in his cell).

Finally, I think this is worth examining because the great mental contradiction of infinity plays both angel and devil for Mersault. He is comforted by infinity, but loses all sense of passing time or awareness of his case and impending death. He is placated by the details, but is unable to just provide a convincing performance for a jury. In the end, his inability to discern absurdity leads him to continuously make dangerous choices, ones that eventually take his life. And in his death, nothing significant takes place—“His logic is simple, and mystifying: since all men die, everything that men do is of equal value”—indeed, nothing significant can take place in such an infinite landscape. (Bersani 217)

So, in the end, Camus’s use of infinity, as much as it might be comforting for Mersault, should not comfort us. He zooms way, way in on a concept at once divine and human, rational and irrational. To be human is to be frightened of such a view. Camus seems to suggest, instead, that Mersault is valiant for this. He is doing what humans do—surviving the moment he is in. Camus’s whole point in Myth of Sisyphus, after all, was not that you should be happy if you wake up as Sisyphus one day. It was that Sisyphus, having been in this situation for millennia, must be imagined happy, as his humanity would lead him to be. While staring deep into infinity, Mersault becomes a reflection of all of us, confronted with time and infinity. When a friend dies. When you stare out the subway window. When you rep out a set at the gym, quietly enjoying the peaceful, repetitive state. When you look into space and imagine it going on forever and ever. For Camus, L’ Étranger is really no more absurd than real life. In a Camusian landscape, infinity is our daily prison cell, the one that entertains us.
 
#### Bibliography
<small>Bersani, Leo. “The Stranger’s Secrets.” NOVEL: A Forum on Fiction, vol. 3, no. 3, 1970, pp. 212–24. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/1344914.

Brombert, Victor. “Camus and the Novel of the ‘Absurd.’” Yale French Studies, no. 1, 1948, pp. 119–23. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/2928869.
Camus, Albert. L’ Etranger. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, 2012.

Feder, Rachel. “The Poetic Limit: Mathematics, Aesthetics, and the Crisis of Infinity.” ELH, vol. 81, no. 1, 2014, pp. 167–95.

Geljon, Albert-Kees. “Divine Infinity in Gregory of Nyssa and Philo of Alexandria.” Vigiliae Christianae, vol. 59, no. 2, 2005, pp. 152–77.

Hall, H. Gaston. “Aspects of the Absurd.” Yale French Studies, no. 25, 1960, pp. 26–32. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/2928897.

Hintikka, Jaakko. “Aristotelian Infinity.” The Philosophical Review, vol. 75, no. 2, 1966, pp. 197–218. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/2183083.

Hudon, Louis. “The Stranger and the Critics.” Yale French Studies, no. 25, 1960, pp. 59–64. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/2928902.

Ohayon, Stephen. “Camus’ ‘the Stranger’: The Sun-Metaphor and Patricidal Conflict.” American Imago, vol. 40, no. 2, 1983, pp. 189–205.

Parsons, Charles. “Infinity and Kant’s Conception of the ‘Possibility of Experience.’” The Philosophical Review, vol. 73, no. 2, 1964, pp. 182–97. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/2183335.

Tall, David. “Intuitions of Infinity.” Mathematics in School, vol. 10, no. 3, 1981, pp. 30–33.

Wagner, C. Roland. “The Silence of ‘the Stranger.’” Modern Fiction Studies, vol. 16, no. 1, 1970, pp. 27–40.</small>
